---
title: Who pushed the box?
---

In our understanding of how nature works, there is an unspoken assumption that
things are caused by some other things. For example, when we see someone
pushing a box, we immediately assume that the force applied on the box is
causing the motion of the box. The notion of causation is so ingrained that all
action verbs contain an implicit assumption - I "pushed" the box means I caused
the box to move. And yet, the laws of physics don't seem to deal with causation
explicitly. Newton's second law merely says that force and acceleration are
constrained to be proportional to each other, and not that the force causes
acceleration.

After all, all we know from experiment is that force and acceleration go
hand-in-hand. Where we see one, the other is always there. The idea that
acceleration follows from force is a human belief. It might as well be that
behind the scenes, someone is looking at the motion of all objects and causing
a force to be applied to them. Then did we just arbitrarily choose force to be
the cause and acceleration to be the effect? Or is it just too deeply programmed
into our brains?

I think we label events as "cause" and "effect" is based on the fact that a
single "effect" might have multiple likely "causes" while a "cause" always has
the same effect. For example, we observe, in separate events, that two massive
balls accelerate towards each other and two oppositely charged balls accelerate
towards each other. Whenever we've observed two massive balls, they're always
found to be accelerating closer, and so also when we've observed two charged
balls. However, when we observe two balls accelerating towards each other, they're
seen to be either oppositely charged or massive (or magnetic or whatever).
It is by this asymmetry between force and acceleration that we label
gravitational, electrical, and nuclear forces as "causes" the acceleration as the
"effect".

This is probably what makes quantum mechanics so counter-intuitive. What we
classically considered as "causes" can now have multiple possible "effects". If
we we throw an electron at a wall, sometimes the electron bounces back and
sometimes it goes through. We got around the issue by saying that there is still
causality - forces cause wavefunctions. That is, a force always causes the
same wavefunction, whereas a wavefunction could have been generated by different
possible forces. But that still leaves the question open - what caused the
electron to bounce back some times and go through the rest of the time? Or
perhaps, the notion of causality simply does not work in the quantum world.
